Electronic Music
-----------------------
- 1966
- von Foerster, Heinz; Beauchamp, James
- [Music By Computer](https://file.io/sFKzs8VhS2jG)
- Since the electronic computer was invented, its usefulness to society has been limited more by the imagination of man than by the capability of the hardware. The possibility of a computer creating music, art, or literature is perhaps obscure only because our pride forces us to believe these areas are man's exclusive provinces. The 1966 Fall Joint Computer Conference scheduled a highly creative, imaginative and enjoyable session on Computers in Music... The papers read there form the basis of this book, and focus on three aspects of the use of computers in generating music. First, computer hardware and software for implementing the generation of sounds are discussed under the heading Systems and Programs. Second, the versatility of digital computers in exploring rules of succession and synchronism is demonstrated in the section, Composition. Finally, the problem of judgment entering perception - i.e., what is "beautiful" and what is "ugly," or to put it into information theoretical terms, what distinguishes signal from noise - is taken up in the section Aesthetics. At the end of the book, the reader may turn into a listener. A pocket of the back cover contains four high-fidelity records of all the examples mentioned in the text, which allows the testing of the presented theories by skeptics and enthusiasts alike.
-----------------------
- 1972
- Oram, Daphne
- [An Individual Note: of Music, Sound, and Electronics](https://file.io/lUzFcKrRVp00)
- ‘An Individual Note’ is both curious and remarkable. When commissioned to write a book, Oram was keen to avoid it becoming a manual or how-to guide, preferring instead to use the opportunity to muse on the subjects of music, sound, and electronics, and the relationships between them. At a time when the world was just starting to engage with electronic music and the technology was still primarily in the hands of music studios, universities, and corporations, her approach was both innovative and inspiring, encouraging anyone with an interest in music to think about the nature, capabilities, and possibilities that the new sounds could bring. And her thinking was not limited to just the future of the orchestra, synthesizer, computer, and home studio, but ventured, with great spirit and wit, into other realms of science, technology, culture, and thought. ‘An Individual Note’ is a playful yet compelling manifesto for the dawn of electronic music and for our individual capacity to use, experience, and enjoy it.
-----------------------
- 2001
- Cascone, Kim
- [The Aesthetics of Failure: 'Post-Digital' Tendencies in Contemporary Computer Music](https://file.io/5oMwGLjOX2el)
- Computer Music Journal 24:4 (Winter 2002)
-----------------------
- 2004
- Roads, Curtis
- [Microsound](https://file.io/8Ybfu1mPE88y)
- Below the level of the musical note lies the realm of microsound, of sound particles lasting less than one-tenth of a second. Recent technological advances allow us to probe and manipulate these pinpoints of sound, dissolving the traditional building blocks of music—notes and their intervals—into a more fluid and supple medium. The sensations of point, pulse (series of points), line (tone), and surface (texture) emerge as particle density increases. Sounds coalesce, evaporate, and mutate into other sounds... Covering all aspects of composition with sound particles, Microsound offers composition theory, historical accounts, technical overviews, acoustical experiments, descriptions of musical works, and aesthetic reflections.
-----------------------
- 2005
- Teboul, Ezra
- [Silicon Luthiers: Contemporary Practices In Electronic Music Hardware](https://file.io/Pv66yxV0NnLx) 
- Masters Thesis (Digital Musics MA, Dartmouth College, completed 2015) This thesis focuses on the development of luthiery in contemporary electronic music instruments. Following a definition of the concept of post-optimal objects, a brief history of circuit design and electronic music offers context for an analysis of recent projects, linking open documentation to invention, do it yourself, hacking, bending and self-learning... These projects are further contextualized by a series of interviews with their authors. By working through results and processes, this document exposes how these items can be described post-optimal objects. Through a personalization of the devices, these varied design methods allows individuals to curate more satisfying interactions with their instruments, audiences and professional community.
------------------------
- 2006
- Collins, Nicolas
- [Handmade Electronic Music](https://file.io/2DEKcOE4MkbC)
- In 1999, when I started teaching in the Department of Sound at The School of the Art Institute of Chicago, I discovered that my students had adopted the computer as an almost universal tool. They were adept at using their laptops to edit a video, compose a dance track, retouch a photo, lay out a poster, write a term paper, and design a Web site. Using the keyboard's command X and command V, they could cut and paste anything. But what the computer offered in the way of power and universality was obtained at the expense of touch. These were artists, after all, and even the filmmakers and webmasters started out scribbling on paper. Many of them complained about the lack of immediacy and tactility in digital media, and in 2002 I designed a course to show my students some electronic alternatives to the computer -- ways to bridge the gap between the sound world of a generation raised in an electronic culture and the gestural tradition of the hand. My class handouts grew into a crude PDF textbook, which somehow escaped the walls of the school. Emails began to arrive asking me to conduct workshops. An editor at Routledge, invited me to elevate my drawings and prose to a publishable state, and the result was Handmade Electronic Music -- The Art of Hardware Hacking (2006) (an expanded second edition was published in 2009). Assuming no technical background whatsoever, the book carries the reader through a series of sound-producing electronic construction projects, from making simple contact microphones, to transforming cheap electronic toys into playable instruments, to designing circuits from scratch. Along the way, I put the technologies into historical and aesthetic context through information about, and audio and video samples by, artists who have used similar devices to make significant musical breakthroughs
------------------------
- 2006
- Puckette, Miller
- [Theories and Techniques of Electronic Music](https://file.io/5vAFPhb42KHH)
- Each chapter starts with a theoretical description of one technique or problem area and ends with a series of working examples (over 100 in all), covering a wide range of applications. A unifying approach is taken throughout; chapter two, for example, treats both sampling and wavetable synthesis as special cases of one underlying technique. Although the theory is presented quantitatively, the mathematics used goes no further than trigonometry and complex numbers. The examples and supported software along with a machine-readable version of the text are available on the web and maintained by a large online community. The Theory and Techniques of Electronic Music is valuable both as a textbook and as professional reading for electronic musicians and computer music researchers.
-----------------------
- 2012
- Peters, Deniz; Eckel, Gerhard; Dorschel, Andreas
- [Bodily Expression in Electronic Music: Perspectives on Reclaiming Performativity]()
- The book explores the relationship between electronic music and bodily expression from perspectives including aesthetics, philosophy of mind, phenomenology, dance and interactive performance arts, sociology, computer music and sonic arts, and music theory, transgressing disciplinary boundaries and established beliefs.
-----------------------
- 2013
- Bartee, Jordan
- [Ontological Toys](https://file.io/psCRUMrtJfQa)
- PhD thesis. This dissertation chronicles the development of Ming Mecca, an experimental modular synthesizer and videogame console designed and engineered by the author. Modular synthesizers are a type of electronic musical instrument composed of various distinct electronic circuits--or "modules"--that generate and manipulate voltage. Whereas most modular synthesizers generate sound or music, Ming Mecca repurposes the paradigm to generate interactive graphical videogame worlds. It consists of two modules that conform to the EuroRack modular standard: the Control Core for videogame controller input, and the World Core for video, physics, and collision processing. Ming Mecca is designed to interface with any synthesizer that generates EuroRack-compatible voltage, creating videogame worlds via a plurality of arbitrarily networked machines. In so doing, it transposes virtual world creation from software into hardware, bringing videogame programming parameters and control structures to a physical interface. The dissertation considers videogame worlds as philosophical playgrounds through which ontological questions can be posed and explored. Through an analysis of object-oriented ontology, Ian Bogost's "applied" philosophy, and the author’s personal mediations on the Commodore 64 home computer, it is argued that Ming Mecca represents a new category of device, standing at the intersection of art, instrument design, videogame design, philosophy, and technology. This new category--the ontological toy--is described not only as it relates to Ming Mecca, but also in terms of its essential high-level properties. Ontological toys transpose ontology from text-based forms into physically interactive systems optimized for experimental play. Using Chaim Gingold’s world-based theory of videogames as a starting point, ontological toys are shown to have four essential qualities: abstraction, broadness, freedom, and authorship. Abstraction refers to an internal tension between the toy’s abstract visual presentation and rich procedural simulation. Broadness concerns the relationship between the microscopic and macroscopic levels of the toy. Freedom and authorship describe how low-level processes can be combined to generate complex high-level effects, allowing the user to inject their own philosophical concerns into the toy. The key innovation of Ming Mecca is shown to be the degree to which it facilitates ontological authorship.
